---
title: Let's Watch: White Zombie
description: Two things I enjoy are folklore and zombies. Oddly in spite of the latter I've never been much of a movie fan; being deaf means I'm obliged to use subtitles and since I'm reading anyway, why not just read a book? But I am interested in the origins of the zombies we know and love today, so since it's Zombie Awareness Month, I've decided to embark on a journey of cinematic discovery, if you will, a zomboddysey, of the zombie canon in cinematic history. So let's watch White Zombie!
date: 2017-05-07 14:20:00
lastmod: 2017-05-07 14:20:00
---

>“The eyes were the worst. It was not my imagination. They were in truth like the eyes of a dead man, not blind, but staring, unfocused, unseeing. The whole face, for that matter, was bad enough. It was vacant, as if there was nothing behind it. It seemed not only expressionless, but incapable of expression.”
>_Magic Island_, W. Seabrook

_White Zombie_ (1932) is generally regarded as the first zombie movie in cinematic history, and it's the one that directors Victor and Edward Halperin are probably best known for. It was a surprise hit at the box office despite critics dismissing it at the time as "childish, old-fashioned and melodramatic." The screenplay by Garnett Weston was inspired by William B Seabrook’s 1929 book, ]_The Magic Island_](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Magic-Island-William-Seabrook/dp/048679962X), a "best and most thrilling book of exploration" and indeed the book that first introduced the concept of zombies to the West. Weston also apparently took inspiration from a 3 act Broadway play called _Zombie_, by Kenneth Webb, caustically reviewed by _Time_ in 1932:

>Mr. William Seabrook’s romantic fibs about far-off places do no one any harm, and have certainly not harmed Zombie, whose playwright (Kenneth Webb) seems to have read author Seabrook’s The Magic Island... For the most part wretchedly acted (including the work of Miss Pauline Starke, deep-voiced one-time film actress) and beset with deplorably written dialog...
>“Theatre: New Plays in Manhattan: Feb. 22, 1932”
>[_Time Magazine_](http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,743239-1,00.html)

The film opened in March 1929, just one month after the play's Broadway debut, and Kenneth Webb promptly sued the brothers Halperin for infringement. Luckily for them, they won the case. The play was performed 21 times, and the manuscript unfortunately seems to be lost to time. _White Zombie_ too was lost at one point, and on its rediscovery in the 1960s, film distributor Frank Storace approached the copyright holders, asking to produce a restored version. The estate of Stanley Krellberg (the copyright holder at the time) refused to give up the footage in an acrimonious legal battle. There have been remasters since, from archive material, so the loss of the original footage may not even matter much in the end. 

As for the movie itself; at only 73 minutes long, it is worth watching. Is it good? Jesus Christ, no, of course it isn't. With the exception of the always-good-value Béla Lugosi as creepy magician "Murder Legendre" (no, really), the acting and dialogue truly is dreadful stuff; I mean to say: "I thought that beauty alone would satisfy. But the soul is gone. I can't bear those empty, staring eyes."

The basic plot is that Madeline and Neil, due to be married, have been very kindly offered the home of one Monsieur Beaumont, a plantation owner in Haiti. He has offered them his home in which to perform the service, having apparently only met them once or twice. Beaumont, of course, isn't offering this out of the kindness of his heart - he has fallen in love with Madeline and like some kind of pre-war PUA, has decided to wrestle this prize possession from Neil's grasp by whatever means necessary. 

Off he goes to the fabulously evil sorceror Murder Legendre who tells him straight out that he's pissing in the wind if he thinks Madeline is going to ditch Neil for him. Legendre does have another trick up his sleeve though, and hands Beaumont a vial of deadening brew for him to administer to the luckless Madeline if she doesn't see things his way. 

Back at the house, it's wedding time. Beaumont escorts Mads to the hall and suggests that she might like to forget all this wedding nonsense and stay with him instead. She tells him where to get off. He gives her a flower spiked with the Zombie Formula 3000 to sniff. Wedding proceeds. At the meal, Mads suddenly keels over and dies. RIP. 

But of course, she's not really dead, she's just been put in a metabolically inactive state by Legendre's potion, which allows her "corpse" to be carted out of its tomb as soon as the coast is clear. She's taken back to Murder's evil villain mountain compound by his pet zombies. Madeline is now transformed into Beaumont's zombie love slave, but he realises fairly quickly that it's not nearly as much fun as he thought it would be (she's very boring now, you see), and demands Legendre fix it. Legendre fixes it by zombifying Beaumont too, and I'm not ashamed to say I cheered at the screen. 

Meanwhile, the local missionary, Bruner, who is the only useful character in the entire movie aside from Legendre, has speculated that the freshly missing corpse-Madeline wasn't dead at all. Perhaps she has instead been put to sleep and then taken away by the natives. “In the hands of the natives!?” cries Neil in horreur. “Better dead than that!”. Lordy. Bruner and Neil head off to the mountain lair to save Madeline, Beaumont has a crisis of conscience and Legendre gets his comeuppance. 

None of the characters are particularly likeable. The winsome Madeline is undeveloped as a character or as a human being, just a tabula rasa of sorts onto which the male characters project their own desire. Neil is not much better. I was very puzzled during the scene where Beaumont escorts Madeline to the aisle, imploring her not to enter the room, and bemoaning that he was about to lose her forever. "What a strange speech to give your wife-to-be right before you marry her?", I thought. It wasn't until several minutes later I recalled that in fact she was supposed to be marrying _Neil_, not Beaumont, so memorable was the true love of her life. 

After Madeline's damselling-in-the-refrigerator, it is somewhat amusing to see Neil fall into the damsel role himself (multiple swooning faints and all!) while attempting to rescue her, and having to be lugged around by Bruner. The genuinely interesting relationship in the film is that between Beaumont and Legendre, as Beaumont realises that his Faustian bargain is catching up with him, while Legendre treats his latest acquisition with the fascination of a scientist observing a new specimen under the microscope. 

Though the acting is stiffer than a day-old corpse and the dialogue weak and laughable, there are some strikingly good things about the movie. Lugosi's performance, as already noted, is excellent, and the almost dreamlike visual style is a masterpiece of interplay between light and dark. The brothers Halperin were ambivalent towards sound in pictures at the time, both being directors of some success during the silent era. For _White Zombie_ they had made the deliberate decision to treat the film like a silent picture, to carry it along with the strength of its visuals. This is why the film was seen as old-fashioned, even back in 1932 - talking pictures had been the defacto standard for around 5 years at this point, so the (mercifully) minimal dialogue and over-acted theatrical style seemed absurdly anachronistic. The Halperins did make good use of atmospheric music and sound effects (relatively uncommon at the time), and the combination of visual and sound effect makes the scene where Beaumont visits Legendre's sugar mill still very creepy even today. The black and white costume design, too, speaks of a visually-arresting symbolic battle between the forces of darkness and purity. 

The film is public domain, and there are several versions on Youtube. I watched [this version](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lQ0hL4EBC58) with the help of Open Subtitles and the Subtitles for Youtube extension. 

I give this minor classic masterpiece 3 ouangas out of a possible 5!

<div class="zombie-stars three-of-five">3 / 5</div>
